You know the drill now.
I'm about to introduce the next keynote speaker,
JD Lang, with a poem.
Introducing JD...
Sorry, JD Long.
Try and get your name right.
Introducing JD Long, a legend in the field.
Open source wizard, his knowledge unsealed.
Since 2002, he pondered with might.
Open source tools, can they take flight?
Look at risk management, he knows it well.
13 years deep, with stories to tell.
With R and Python, he crafts his art.
Jupyter Labs, our studio, all play their part.
In Richmond, Virginia, he makes his home.
With wife and daughter, they brightly roam.
A recovering lawyer, a philosopher teen,
in this vibrant family, dreams are seen.
Oh, thank you all.
Thank you very much.
You know, it's funny.
I didn't realize Hadley was doing the poems
before everyone.
And this is like, I'm an artist who's been
put out of business by Chad GPT,
because in 2000, I don't know,
13 years ago or something,
I spoke at the R and Finance conference
here in Chicago.
I did a lightning talk,
because that's run out of here in Chicago.
And my gag was, I did it in Seussian rhyme,
and it was hilarious, right?
Because nobody comes to a freaking finance conference
and gives a whole lightning talk
in Seussian rhyme, and now anyone can do it,
and they hardly have to work at all.
Ah, so frustrating.
Well, I just want to say hi to you all.
I love being here.
It's exciting to be back in Chicago.
I helped start the Chicago R User Group
many years ago, and it started as,
we had some guys, they were all guys at the time,
R and Finance guys and myself,
and we were going to Jake's Tap
and talking about R, right?
And Jake's Tap is closed now.
Ah, moment of silence for Jake's Tap.
Or was it Jack's?
It's Jack's Tap, I think, right?
Anyway, I don't know.
Fantastically good times, and we decided
we should just invite other people, right?
We're having good conversation,
and what we'll do is we'll do
what we would like to participate in,
but we'll include other people.
And it's so lovely to see that
the Chicago R User Group is still,
you know, alive and well and kind of
following that ethos of, you know,
share the things you're doing
and include other people,
and that's really kind of an R community ethos
and also, you know, an RStudio slash Posit ethos,
and it makes for a fantastic community.
So speaking of that, like four years ago,
I showed up at the RStudio conference at the time
and gave a presentation,
and I wore, you know, a shirt with this pattern on it
because I tried to explain to people
what I do for a living,
and this was the best way to explain it
because I'm an agricultural economist
who works for a global reinsurance company,
so it's easier just to say spreadsheets and bullshit.
And Mike Smith saw this shirt and liked it,
and I promised him one,
and then COVID happened and life happened,
and Mike Smith, come get your shirt.
This is for you, Mike.
So we'll just lay this right here,
and Mike Smith can come make his way down here
and grab this,
and if the size is wrong, Mike,
we'll get you one in the right size.
So I need to, I do work for a financial services firm,
so I work for Renaissance Free,
and I am not my employer, nor am I representing them.
I'm not discussing reinsurance here,
and all the ideas here are mine
unless otherwise stated.
This isn't business, this is pleasure.
And a little funny story.
I was trying to think how long I've known Hadley and JJ,
and I knew them separately before they were working together,
and I stumbled on this.
Back in 2010, for Hadley Wickham's birthday,
so almost 13 years ago last week,
I sent Hadley a copy of
Generalized Additive Models, an Introduction with R,
which had been on his wish list in Amazon
because he was a poor, starving faculty at Rice University,
and he was maintaining open source software,
and not only that,
he was answering my stupid questions on Stack Overflow.
And I wrote in the gift note,
thanks for helping me kick ass with Plyer,
now that's the precursor to dPlyer,
Plyer and R,
I appreciate the tools and the help you've given me
on Stack Overflow.
And this is the kind of community we have, right?
And I just think it's hilarious.
Hadley had no recollection of this.
I asked him about this a couple days ago.
No memory of this whatsoever.
But that doesn't keep me from this being my financial disclosure
of my relationship with Hadley.
And if anybody is wondering
how you become a keynote speaker at Posit,
the price is $68.78
and 13 years.
Well, I enjoyed,
so I had no idea when I started forming this presentation
that Jeremy was going to be one of the keynote speakers.
But I really enjoyed listening to JJ and Jeremy
do this thing they called a two-way AMA,
which I didn't know what that's called.
I've been calling it having a conversation,
and I'm just not really cool, right?
So I learned that this is called a two-way AMA,
and they recorded their two-way AMA,
and it's on YouTube, and it's really fantastic.
And I was listening to this
as I was driving from my parents' house
to Nashville, Tennessee,
and if my family hadn't been with me,
I would have pulled over to the side of the road
because I was listening to just the audio on my iPhone,
and I would have pulled over to the side of the road
and made notes.
So I ended up listening to it
and going back and listening to it again.
And one of the things that jumped out is
they made the comment of if you think about
how you help both new users ramp into things
and make experienced users productive,
you provide these abstractions,
and there's a dial of how leaky
you want the abstraction to be.
Now, a bunch of us who've been around software,
maybe worked in software engineering,
but definitely talked about to software engineers,
know this idea of abstractions and leaky abstractions.
In this community,
a bunch of us come through clinical sciences
or we come through other fields
that aren't computation first,
and I was thinking this term is really powerful,
both abstractions and the idea of an abstraction leaking.
These are really important concepts
that I think we should more widely ingest.
So when Headley contacted me and said,
hey, you want a keynote?
I'm like, yeah, what's themes or whatever?
And he's basically like,
I don't know, you use Python and R,
maybe like some, I don't know,
do whatever you're thinking about, right?
Well, it just happened, I was thinking about this,
and this has been one of the things
I've been thinking about with my team
and the people I work with,
is how do we talk explicitly about abstractions,
leaky abstractions, and how we deal with those leaks?
So let's talk a little bit about abstractions
and leaky abstractions.
So first thing I did was go back,
I thought I knew where this came from,
and I confirmed that while the term leaky abstraction
was around in the zeitgeist,
it really didn't get traction in the tech community
until Joel Spolsky wrote this blog post
over 20 years ago,
and he calls it the law of leaky abstractions,
and the law is all non-trivial abstractions
to some degree are leaky.
And what he means by that is an abstraction failure,
sometimes a little, sometimes a lot,
there's leakage, things go wrong,
it happens all over the place
when you have abstractions, right?
So it means that you have this thing you're relating to,
it's abstracted away so you have an interface,
an API, a calling to a function,
and you interface with it in a way
and it doesn't do what you expect.
That's a leak.
So the question becomes, what do you do?
So you've got, if you want to be a master
of any abstraction, not just a user,
but a master of the abstraction,
you have to understand what's under the abstraction.
Now that's the only way you can truly debug
or truly understand an abstraction
is to understand at least one layer beyond.
And I did a lot of research trying to figure out
who originally said this concept of
you've got to understand one abstraction below
in order to be proficient and debug one abstraction,
and everything I found was sort of like
everybody just knows that.
Like nobody attributes that thought to anyone,
it's just in the zeitgeist that that is reality,
so I guess it's like an axiom.
So when we think about abstraction,
I want to expand what I mean,
because many of you are probably thinking
something like this,
and I just like Googled computing abstraction, right?
Where we have at the high level,
you have like a high level language
or an application,
and then it goes through an assembly language program
and the assembler turns it into machine code,
and then it, like actually,
then there's a bunch of hardware abstractions,
and then an actual calculation gets done
inside the hardware of the machine.
That's how we often think about abstractions.
I want to expand that for the purpose of this conversation,
because there's also organizational abstractions.
So if you think of an abstraction as
we've got some set of directives we're passing down,
and we kind of don't care specifically
how things get done in the next layer,
we just want the next layer to do something,
well that's not unlike organizational structures.
I come from corporate America, right?
So I think,
but this generally concept applies to your nonprofit
or your software company
or even your civic organization.
At some level,
we have a board of directors or some committee,
and they pass down directives and priorities
to the executive management.
The executive management makes a bunch of choices
and then passes things down to department heads
who pass it to team leads,
who pass it to team contributors,
and if we continue to think about this,
they then pass those on to computers in some way, right?
Like they pass in because they use applications
or they use high-level coding languages or something,
and then all that other stuff from the slide before
happens underneath this.
It's abstractions all the way down, right?
There's the title of my talk.
So why though,
like why do we need these abstractions all the way down?
Wouldn't it be easier if we just had,
like I grew up on a farm,
and the great thing about farming is
you have to do everything because you don't have staff.
The worst thing about farming is
you have to do everything because you don't have staff, right?
So you become a master of every level of abstraction
until you get in over your head
and you have to have John Deere
repair some piece of machinery or something, right?
But you become,
all the way up and down the levels of abstraction,
you become at least proficient.
It's been hard for me to get used to organizations
that didn't expect me to run up and down the stack, right?
Because I want to run up and down all the abstractions.
Well, the reason we can't always do that
was really articulated back in the 50s by Herbert Simon.
He's an economist, I'm an economist,
so I've got to get economists in here.
He had this article in 1957 called
Administrative Behavior,
A Study of Decision-Making Processes
in Administrative Organizations,
and he coined the phrase bounded rationality,
which I TLDR as head trunk only hold so much junk,
which Gary Lawson captured in this cartoon
where it says, Mr. Osborne, may I be excused?
My brain is full.
We can only handle so many levels of abstraction
and so many pieces of the stack
before our brain overflows,
and we can't make sense of all the pieces.
And so we build these interfaces,
and even if we are the person
traversing the levels of abstraction,
we would like to interface with different pieces of them
and not think about what happens below them,
even if we wrote what's below them,
because it means when we're problem-solving here,
we don't have to think about how the read-write
is happening on the database.
That just magically happens behind an abstract interface,
and we don't have to think about it,
and it allows us to work at the problem-solving level
that's appropriate for what we're trying to accomplish.
That seems to make a lot of sense, right, intuitively?
So let's talk a little bit about what abstractions are for
and what they are not for.
So one thing I want to point out that they're not for
is they're not for gatekeeping,
and I see this being done a lot, right?
You're not a real data scientist unless you, you know,
PyTorch or deep learning or whatever.
Those are all different abstractions, different tools,
that are used in certain places to solve certain problems.
Those may not be your problems.
Then you don't need to know that abstraction.
You don't need to be a master of that abstraction.
You don't need to be one layer below,
and I watch a lot of early learners
run around learning abstractions, learning tools,
because they feel like if they don't know this tool,
they're not a real whatever-it-is-they-think-they-want-to-be.
That's really toxic, because you'll wear yourself out
because this guy has already said
you can't fit it all in your head in a really useful way.
So don't let the learning of abstractions be like,
oh, once I accumulate a big enough toolbox of these abstractions,
then I'm a real whatever.
That's just gatekeeping, and cut that out.
You don't even have to know all the abstractions you use deeply.
But you do need to know your limits.
So know which abstractions you really understand.
Recognize when you're up against an abstraction that you don't grok,
so you don't understand the abstraction.
It's a breakpoint.
You're like, I don't really understand what's going on beyond here.
At that point, you have a choice.
You can either learn that abstraction,
learn what's really going on beyond it,
so that you can deeply understand it,
or you can partner with someone who's an expert there.
Partnership and pairing with someone else
and working with someone else is always an option.
It may be harder in some organizations than others,
especially if you're the only person on the data science team.
You may feel some pressure to learn those abstractions,
and that may be the right choice.
But if you're in a larger organization,
and someone else in the organization is a master of that abstraction,
you may not need to become the expert on database indexing.
Contact Kara. She seems to know a lot about it.
And we have to choose, make that choice.
Now, what I see happen a lot
is people blame an abstraction for problems when they bump up against it.
And often the problem is,
they don't understand what the abstraction is doing.
Now, that may be a leaky abstraction,
but still, it's like,
okay, my dashboard doesn't refresh fast enough.
My database has a problem.
I had literally this one within the last year.
And I worked with the Power BI developer,
and we discovered that when using direct query in Power BI,
which is how you access any database
that isn't the one that's built into Power BI,
it issues all the queries in series
and will not issue them in parallel.
So the dashboard had, you know, 13 queries
that all took three seconds.
They could have been run in parallel,
and the whole thing refreshed in three seconds.
Instead, it took 13 times 30,
because it was running them in serial.
And the analyst had thought, oh, this database is crap.
And I'm like, actually,
Microsoft is shunting you into buying more cloud storage
so you can shove your data into their platform
instead of letting you use your own perfectly good database
because they force your connection
to issue queries in serial.
And I'm like, that's broken, right?
That's not a leaky abstraction by accident.
That's a leaky abstraction by sales, right?
And that should make anybody that runs into that one angry.
And it made me angry.
And I'm like, we've got to get other tools.
This is ridiculous.
Like, we're being manipulated.
We're being played.
And my analyst didn't know it, right?
Because he didn't really understand that abstraction.
He didn't realize how to go into the database,
get the logs,
and see that they were happening in serial.
But he does now, right?
But that's an example of don't blame the abstraction.
Understand the abstraction.
Understand what's going on.
And then decide what you want to do with that information.
So I would, if I did anything
where I dabble with, like, computer sciencey concepts
and I don't quote Edgar Dijkstra here,
I would probably be remiss.
So he has this kind of great quote
that says,
Programming, when stripped of all its
circumstantial irrelevancies,
boils down to no more and no less
than very effective thinking
so as to avoid unmastered complexity
to very vigorous separations
of your many different concerns.
Right?
And the TLDR is,
constrain complexity and separate concerns.
That's what we're trying to do with abstractions.
And that's what you should be doing
when you're writing functions
inside your in-house libraries.
Your first priority should be,
how do we make it less complex?
How do we separate concerns?
And that's that,
even if you understand
and you built the pieces
that are under certain abstractions,
if you can separate those from your thinking
while you think about this piece of the problem,
you've got less of a sandcastle in your head
to build the tools
and do the analysis you want to deal with
because you've got a lot of the complexity pushed away
and you know that if you have a certain problem,
which piece of complexity
you then need to go look at.
It's not all commingled together.
So that's a really good concept
and that was, you know,
he wrote that down in 1975.
And I'm not sure we've done a really good job
embracing that.
I know I haven't.
So, let's do a fun example
about thinking about abstractions.
Anybody in here an intellectual engineer?
Oh, more than I expected.
I'm going to ask you guys, like,
not to yell at me.
Like, just stick with me.
Just stick with me.
It's a thought exercise.
Don't rush the stage here.
Electricity is a fundamental abstraction for computing,
obviously, right?
We know this is all powered by electricity.
We know, like,
we've got gigabit switches in our office,
so that's a billion bits of information a second.
There's a bunch of wires
and we don't really know how that works,
but it's got to be at least going, like,
millions of ups and downs of voltage a second, right?
Inside your gigabit switch.
That little light blinks fast, right?
It feels like something like that.
And so, like,
how fast do the electrons flow in our wires?
So, just think about this for a minute.
Don't yell an answer.
How fast do they go?
And I'm like, well, okay,
well, we're flipping the little bits up and down,
you know, a million times a second or more,
maybe a billion in the wire,
some big number.
That's really fast.
That's a lot of,
that's got to be moving fast
to turn it on and turn it off that fast.
It feels really fast, you know.
I don't open the refrigerator door and it's dusk.
It's always, you know, light straight on.
When I was in middle school,
they showed me illustrations that look like this,
and I think the red balls are the electrons, right?
So, the battery forces the electrons through,
so those things must be going really fast.
You know, and then the next year,
the teacher did this diagram
and likened electric current flow to, like, water flow,
and, you know, resistor was like a restriction on the pipe,
and we got that,
and that was really helpful,
so this all kind of points me to,
this stuff's going, like, really fast.
We're probably going near speed of light,
but it can't be the speed of light.
It's, you know, there's some resistance from the wire,
and that's why wires get hot,
but it can't be too much
because they get really hot all the time,
and they don't, so I don't know.
We're probably pushing the speed of light
inside these wires, right?
Yeah, no, it's 8 centimeters an hour at 1 watt.
What?
Right, okay, who was surprised by that number?
Like, it kind of defied your intuition.
The ones with your hands down,
you guys are, like, smarter than me,
and I'm glad you're here
because I want to know smart people.
The problem is
we conflate electromagnetic fields
with electron movement,
so the electromagnetic field moves really fast.
The actual electrons move quite slow,
so in an AC wire,
when you're, you know, drying your hair,
it's something like this.
That's the speed of the actual electrons
moving through the wire,
which kind of blows a lot of people's intuition
when they learned with these metaphors,
like I showed you on the previous slide.
If anybody finds this interesting
and would like to go read more,
oh, by the way, if you want to take pictures
of my slides or anything, that's great.
Knock yourself out.
At the end, there's a QR code that'll take you
to GitHub repo that has the whole slide in there,
so don't feel like you've got to capture
the links or anything.
But this is a link to a YouTube video
that explains this whole thing,
and it's really interesting, I found.
But why do many of us not know this, right?
Because we use electronics en masse
every day to solve all our problems.
Well, the reason we don't know this
is it doesn't matter.
And not that it doesn't matter
that we don't know it.
It doesn't matter.
It doesn't change anything.
There's absolutely nothing you ever know
where the movement of the electron matters.
That abstraction never leaks.
We never are diagnosing a problem,
and we're like,
I finally get the answer.
It's because I thought the electrons
were moving fast,
and they're actually moving slow.
That's never the problem we have,
because this abstraction just doesn't leak.
Now, there's a whole genre
of YouTube videos and clickbait
that are basically like this.
They surprise you
with some piece of information
you didn't know about something
that you interact with all the time,
and sometimes they're absolutely full of crap.
Because we like this
because it's surprising,
because it's like a dopamine drop
when we're surprised by information.
And at some point, though,
it doesn't matter.
So, you know,
to understand abstraction,
we build these mental models.
We make metaphors
like my water flow
or my electrons being elevated
and moved and dropping.
Often they're wrong metaphors,
and sometimes that doesn't matter
because they allow us to understand
the thing well enough to use it.
So I do my own, like,
home electrical wiring.
I'm rewiring.
I redid my Jeep wiring.
I'm doing a trailer now.
I use computers.
I've got a desk with, you know,
power supply on it
for testing Arduinos
and controlling, you know,
actuators with Arduinos
and Raspberry Pis,
and I understood how electrons flow through a wire.
So my metaphor was
good enough, even though
it was technically wrong.
Well,
what if our mental model is wrong
and it does matter?
Because, you know,
it's not a universal case that it doesn't matter.
So, buckle up.
Let's talk about
floating-point math.
This is my favorite leaky abstraction.
And by the way, I'm only going to have
two slides with code, and they're both Python
because we've got a big community.
We're a very open tent.
You know, if you took,
you know, grade school math,
everyone in here did,
at some point, the teacher,
and if they were very creative,
they did a pretty slide like this one
to explain the associative
property of addition
where it doesn't matter how you group
the things you're adding,
you get the same answer.
Very young. And this is how addition
and multiplication work.
And, you know, I think we all saw
something like this. I stole this slide
literally from, you know, a middle school
review online.
But, we come into
Python, and we go, okay, well,
we got these numbers. They're real numbers.
They're on the number line, right?
We're going to take 1.11, add 2.22,
and then we're going to add 3.33,
and we're going to group them a little
different, and they are not
the same.
And the reason
they are not the same
is floating point addition
and multiplication are not
associative.
And the reason why is illustrated
when I format the
print on these to show
17 decimal points.
Because way out there
in it-doesn't-matter-practically-
to-you land, most of the time,
out there in the
14, 15, 16, 17th
decimal point, you can see these numbers
are just a little
bit different. And that's because
floating point numbers are
an abstraction. They're not
literal point on the
number line like we were taught in
grade school about numbers.
They're something different to make
it work in computers.
And this is why
daddy drinks.
And it's
things like this
that will drive you
insane. Because
even though most of us understand
this about floating point math,
I'll tell you a very quick
story about where I spent two
days with an engineer
last week,
then it was a floating point math problem.
But it didn't come at us as
just value A equals value B.
What we were doing was we were doing a bunch
of math, and then we rank
it. And
after we rank it,
we then say, okay,
I want the row number,
and we use a second
sorting number
to say, basically, if there's ties,
use this other value.
Use this deterministic
number over here to break ties.
Because we want all of our systems to be
deterministic, meaning that there's no random
number generation here, so every time I run
it, I want it to barf out
exactly the same answer. No swapping
values around, right? This is huge.
It ingests like 5 billion
records and
barfs out 11 million
after a bunch of aggregations.
And we were
finding we weren't getting deterministic
answers. Now, out of 11 million,
maybe we would have 30.
That would change every run.
And we were like, that's not cool. What's going on?
And as we dug into it,
what we found is some of the
condition that should have been a tie
was like
this situation where
I was showing you where it's conceptually
the same number, but
they were flipping because, and the
reason it was happening is we were on Spark.
Spark's a distributed system. You don't
control which executors
or how the groupings are done because
it's map-reduced. So every time
we ran it, and maybe we ran it with a different
cluster size, maybe one machine
got the data first,
little things change, and so
when we aggregated these up,
we'd get slightly different floating point rounding
because of the way they were grouped.
And it became
material because of that sort order problem.
We thought we were handling
ties with numbers, but we weren't.
So, I mean, that was easy to solve,
right? We just round those
to some smaller number, you know, or
we cast them into something with
less precision, so we get
rid of that noise out in floating point land.
You know, but we spent two of
our time for like, well, I think there's more
people than that involved, for like four days
trying to figure out why the hell these numbers keep changing,
right? Why is there a ghost in my machine?
Well, if you're interested in this, this isn't
a presentation about floating point numbers, even though
it may feel like it right now. I recommend
reading Julia Evans, you may
know her as Bork,
article about floating point
numbers, and she does a number of
fantastic computer science-y
zines explaining
these concepts using
cartoons, and they're fantastic.
And, you know, she points out
that doing numerical computations on a computer
inherently involves some approximation
and rounding, right? That's
one thing we should all come in this with knowing.
All right.
Enough of floating point math.
I'm an agricultural economist. Let's talk
about silos.
So, Cara mentioned
silos in
organizations, right?
And so let's think about using
our mindset of an abstraction, let's
think about silos for a minute.
What are
if organizations
are abstractions, what's
the abstraction equivalent of
an organizational silo? And I
would say that's a over-
restrictive abstraction,
and it's an abstraction
that when it leaks, you can't
figure out why.
So, let's think
what that, what org abstraction
leakage looked like. So,
where did this number in the
DB, in the database, where did it come from?
If your organization
is highly siloed, you may
not be able to answer that question if your team
didn't calculate it. That's an overly
rigid
abstraction.
Who do I talk to about solving
this problem, whatever that
may be. If you can't answer that,
you've got a siloed organization, right?
It's overly rigid abstraction.
And how was this decision
made, right? Non-
computational, right? It may just be like,
you know, we're making decisions
about people, we're making decisions
about a number of different things.
How were they made?
Well,
the
general evidence of leaking
abstraction, what are those?
Now, these are like,
I went looking for, surely people have articulated
this, and I couldn't really find
any other authors or academic authors
who had really outlined this. I am sure
it's out there, and I am reinventing the wheel.
But the thing I'm always looking for is
unexpected behavior,
uninterpretable
responses, or logical
errors where I,
there's no explanation.
And whether that's my computer
or my organization,
there's no signs of slippage
or leakage in the abstractions.
So, I think of a bunch of this as
really, in an organization, it's a communication
problem, and
communication is like beer.
Communication is the source of and solution
to all our problems.
So, you know, if you run into
where did this number in the DB come from,
there's ways that we can improve communication
in our organization to answer this, right?
We can have the code for the ETL
or whatever in version control,
so Git, GitHub, whatever version control you use,
and available
to the people in the organization who consume
the values, right? And that's really important
because a lot of organizations do
not share, read only is fine,
but they don't share the ETL
process for how they do things with the people
who are consuming those things. That's insanity!
Right? Like, we
can read code, many of us who are doing
things with the data, show us how it was calculated
because it may answer a whole bunch of questions
we have about what we're trying
to do. And, you know,
a wiki page describing the process
if there's a complicated
decision that's made in how we do
grouping, we always omit this,
we always include that, that sort of
stuff, put that junk in a wiki or documentation
that's easily accessible.
So, similarly,
like the question, how do I talk about
solving this? Well, if everything
in the organization has clear ownership,
that one gets resolved really fast
because you talk to the owner of that process
or that system, and we often
let ownership slip and things get
orphaned, and then they just
leak, like, all over the
floor because there's no person
whose job it is to explain
why it's leaking or help stop the leak
or help you understand what the
system is doing. And then
things like, how was this decision
made? Well, that's
better transparency,
leadership communication.
Somebody didn't communicate how
the decision was made or what the process was.
And a bunch of times, those are easily
solved by communication, and
probably, for big decisions,
they need to be communicated multiple
times in multiple ways on multiple
methods. So, a video,
an all-hands
call, an email.
You know, one of the struggles
I have is people tend to act like
email is a reasonable way to access me
when they put me on BCC.
I don't read if I'm on BCC.
The volume of email I get, I can barely
read the stuff that's got my name spelled right.
And everything else
goes into a folder named, like,
BCC Read Later.
Later.
And I,
every once in a while, I miss
important internal corporate
communication because I wasn't paying
attention to that, but my email
volume is much more manageable.
So, don't communicate
very important things to your
organization with them all on BCC.
So, sometimes
we need multiple methods to
communicate to make sure the message isn't dropped.
Alright, with that said,
that's a little bit about organizational
abstraction leakage and how we
might address that. I want to do a little
history, and it wouldn't be a data
science conference with an old man at the
front if we didn't put up
Drew Conway's Venn Diagram
from 2010.
Now, funny story,
I knew Drew when he was a PhD
student at NYU, and
I saw him, like, draw this out
on a napkin, and it, like,
completely blew my brain when
five years later, like, the actuarial
magazines on my actuarial department
desk at work, like,
had this diagram on the cover. I'm like,
this is so weird. So, sometimes I
feel like I'm the Forrest Gump of data science.
It's like, I was sitting at the bar
when Drew Conway wrote this on a napkin, right?
I didn't actually do anything, but, you know, I saw it
go down.
So, what's interesting about this,
and the reason I want to bring it up, is
the thing that was
so revolutionary about this
in 2010, inside of organizations,
is these are
three different abstractions.
And they, one person was,
not only wasn't expected to do this,
one person in many organizations
was not allowed
to do this. I can
remember many times in the early
2000 being told, I couldn't
have coding tools on
my machine at work
because I was not a software
developer. And I'm like, I don't think you
understand what we're doing and what these tools are.
Right? And it's like,
oh no, you're in the business. You get,
you know, Excel.
And I'm like, I can
write code in VBA. You're not going to like
it. Why do I have to use the shitty
code when I could write
good code, and
you're just shunting me into that because
it's the abstraction you're comfortable with. It's not the
abstraction I'm comfortable with.
And what happened since
then, so in only, you know,
13 years, is
it's now totally
acceptable, almost everywhere,
except a few backwards government
organizations, for people
who are doing like data science-y work
in the business, doing analytical
work, to have
first class programming tools
on their machine, and they have
rights and permissions to use those, and
often install packages, and even if
that's from a curated internal repo.
But we can do these
things that 13 years ago we
were literally told we were not allowed
to do. That's a
fundamental change. And
I will assert that the single biggest
business value derived from the data
science movement in the last 13 years
is making it legitimate to
code outside of IT software development
roles. Now, that's a pretty big
assertion, right? A lot of value has come out
of data science. But this is
the, inside of these big
calcified organizations,
seeing all Drew Conway's
diagram inside of
magazines, and executives say,
well, how do we get that? And I look over their
shoulder and say, stop being stupid about
the rules of what we put on our desktop,
or give us access
to, you know, coding tools through a
JupyterLab, or through RStudio
that's centrally hosted. You know,
that opened up for these
tools to permeate across
organizations. And so
these data science roles break
previous organizational abstractions
is my point there, right?
I'll make a second
assertion, and it's tied
into what we talked about earlier.
Abstractions will leak. Spolsky told
us that. Therefore, abstractions
must be permeable to allow
debugging. So that's
my thing of, put your
ETL code where everyone can read it
who might be using the results of it.
That's allowing us to at least
peek through the abstraction
and see what we're getting.
This holds for both organizations and
computers. So inside of
organizations, we need to understand
when those organizational structures leak,
how do we
deal, how do we peek
behind the layer of abstraction? Now, for
me, I've been in an organization,
the same organization for an
insane number of years. I've been at the same employer
for 14 years. I have had the same
boss for 12 years.
My solution is easy. Because of that,
I start calling people, right?
Hey, what's going on with whatever? Or sending
them a text message. But my
analysts don't know who to contact.
So I've got to be that to them.
So I've got to go to them and ask questions of, hey,
do you guys understand what's happening? Do you understand
why? And then we talk.
Okay, some of you may have had questions or thoughts
that you weren't comfortable bringing in the group.
Feel free to hit me up one-on-one.
What I'm trying to do is
these things may be leaking for you.
It's okay. Come to me. Talk about it.
We'll deal with the leaks, and I'll help you understand
what's going on. And this is germane, because
we're right in the middle of acquiring another company.
And there's lots of questions, right?
And some of it I have answers to, and some of it I don't.
But that's how we handle it.
So there's leaky abstractions all the way
up and down your organization, and all the way up and down
our tech stacks. All right, my
assertion three.
No single abstraction is right for everyone.
I think we're going to need more
abstractions. Now, we have found
in our organization, and this is the part
where I'm going to share some things that's not
just my thoughts.
My colleague,
John Moore, and Peter Ilston,
another one of my colleagues, came
up with what we call the 80-16-4.
And it really started as the 80-20 rule,
and then we realized we needed to divide the 20
into two buckets, so we applied the
80-20 rule to the 20, and we got 80-16-4,
because math is fun.
And we like non-Gaussian distributions,
given our world.
So the way we think about everything we do
is 80% of
our users in our organization are
normal business users. Now,
I'm going to present all this from a for-profit
corporate organization. These should project
into your world, and don't,
even though I've got numbers up here,
don't be obsessed with
what that means. This is conceptual.
The vast majority of your folks
are normal business users.
They want to use applications,
dashboards, basic Excel.
That's their tool stack. Those are their
abstractions. And then
16% or so
are super users.
Super users are going to want to do
SQL against the underlying
data that's collected by your tools.
They may want to do a custom dashboard.
They're going to do some advanced Excel,
like pivot tables, and really
processing the data a bit more.
And then 4% are guru users.
Your guru users are like,
oh, I want to do that, but I want to do
it 10,000 times, so can I hit the
API and just do that directly,
pull a result back, make a change,
put it in, run your thing,
pull it back? You know, that's a very
different use case. Or maybe they want a
library, a Python library, an R library
that interacts with your corporate tooling.
Very different
abstractions needed by these
three different groups. And they're cumulative,
right? So the way I think about it is
your super users, they will use the
dashboards and the basic Excel,
but they also want these other things. Your guru
users are, of course, still using
SQL, right? And they're still using
your applications. They're using everything.
This
has been
incredibly helpful for us
because what I had observed
in our organization
and in others is a tendency
to, like, scratch the 80%
itch and then
kind of stop
and make it hard to get the underlying
data. And we had had
at times in our culture where that wasn't the
case, and then as we started specializing
teams, some of this
16 and 4 was getting
dropped sometimes. So, you know, we've
changed kind of the definition of done
on the things we build, saying
we've got to make sure people from all three
of these groups agree
that they have what they need.
Now, it doesn't mean that everything
we do has an API, right? That's
not the principle. The principle is
what the people in that group
need, they have access to.
And I try to be real careful,
like, don't hear me saying, you know, build
APIs everywhere, because then all of
these, no, you're working backwards. Work from
the principle, not from the
implementation. We implement what we
need to address the principle.
How do you know, like, what your guru
users need? We'll just make them an
API. No, you're going to go ask
them, right? Back to communication.
And they may say, oh,
if I just have access to the output data
in SQL, that's more than
enough for me. Great.
Don't build anything specifically
for them. This is
where, like, I really like the
current movement for data products,
because data products are used,
data product meaning, like, it's defined,
it's got a
data dictionary, it's not, like,
tied in necessarily to the whole corporate
database, but it's a
standalone data product, all the fields are
defined, and in our shop,
we have a link to a wiki page, and
a link to the source code that
builds that data product available for
everyone. I love that.
Like, even though when I first heard data product,
I thought it was, like, more marketing BS,
and I just wasn't excited about it,
when I saw what I got from it,
I'm like, oh yeah, data product, I want that.
Because a whole bunch of my 16 and 4's
needs are addressed
by having a good data product, right?
Because it's a good abstraction that
we can peek behind, because of the
documentation and the links to the source code.
So it's fantastic. So,
like, the point there is
multiple abstractions is a
high empathy move, right? I'm here with my
practice radical empathy shirt on.
That's high empathy for
who's actually using it.
Building APIs blindly because
Gartner
says that's a good idea is not a high
empathy move, right?
That's just parroting, you know, what someone
you believe to be a thought leader. Don't do that.
Think. Right? Think about
what people actually need,
and build what they actually need.
And more importantly, don't build stuff they don't need.
And that's hugely
empathetic. So, my big
idea recap is
abstractions start way up with
leaders and go all the way down to
hardware. It's abstractions all the way up
and down. To debug an abstraction,
you have to see what's below it.
We're building mental models of
complex systems, and that's why we
need abstractions, because we can't hold it all in our
head at once. You can't
master all abstractions.
Decide if you're going to learn
or if you're going to partner,
but don't decide to blame the abstraction
you don't know. Ensure
an abstraction is for everyone.
My metric for that is the 80-16-4,
but don't be dumb about it.
And more importantly, just like Hadley helped me
years ago on Stack Overflow,
help everyone kick ass, because
almost nobody really
wants to know how to code or do these things.
We just want to solve some problem,
as Kara said. Or as I say,
we just want to kick ass. Right?
So, here's the
QR code that'll go to these slides.
There's my LinkedIn and my
Mastodon. If you guys want to hit me up there,
I'm happy to talk to y'all.
We've got a few minutes, so let's get
Hadley and do some Q&A.
Thank you, thank you.
So, I had one question
to warm you up. So, obviously, I'm like a
huge fan of abstractions.
A lot of my work is just creating abstractions.
But one of the other things I
enjoy is, in my personal life,
discovering abstractions
that make something outside of work
interesting. Do you have any examples of that
in your life, where you've discovered an abstraction
that you really love? Oh, yeah.
It's so nerdy. Let me think how
to summarize this.
I like old machines,
and I got an old Jeep that has
no moving part on it. That's an original
Jeep. So, it's got a Chevy
small block in it, and it's
had the carburetor replaced
with a throttle body fuel injection.
So, that's a fuel delivery device
that sits where the carburetor could go,
but it's got little jets in a computer,
like a modern vehicle, but it's squirting
into a 1969 small block
Chevy engine. And it is so
fantastic to read the
discussion boards and the
people debugging
throttle body
electronic fuel injection,
because they bring their carburetor
metaphors in,
and they don't work,
and they're just mad
in hell at this thing being
broken, that it doesn't work right,
and it's because they don't understand the
abstraction. And I think about this a lot.
I find debugging the
issues with my electronic fuel injection
pretty straightforward, because it's not
really a complicated system. It's got
two sensors. You just sense the air flow,
and you sense the oxygen at the tailpipe,
and it's a pretty straightforward control
system. But if you don't understand some
of the nuances, you just bang your head
against debugging it, and so
it's very much like this.
Can you suggest
things to watch for that kind of
signal that maybe we've fallen too
far down, like some particular
abstraction rabbit hole, and we
need to pull back up
or look at another abstraction?
Yeah, that's a good
point, and I wish I had these guidelines,
and I might, if I had them,
I might anonymously send them to the
Spark development team.
By the way,
I use Spark a lot,
and this talk was largely
inspired by banging my head against a bunch of
things in Spark. It is the
leakiest abstraction of
any useful piece of software. I've dealt
with software that leaked more, but it
wasn't useful. Spark is incredibly useful,
and it leaks like a sieve.
The abstractions are so leaky.
How to know...
I think we should
always... This is some real Stephen
Covey seven steps of highly
effective people advice, but we need to
keep the end in mind. What
problem are we solving? The goal isn't
more abstractions. The goal
is compartmentalization
of concerns and the problem,
and if we're spending all of our time
redefining new abstractions because
we have an abstraction fetish,
that may not be healthy,
but it is a little bit gray sometimes
to know the right level abstractions, or if you
build an abstraction that's too compartmentalized...
I think one of the examples that's floating
around right now in the zeitgeist online
is the discussion of microservices
and how lots of companies,
the development teams, have looked at what Amazon
and Google do and are like,
oh yeah, everything has to be a microservice.
What is a microservice but a very
specific abstraction, right?
They build thousands of these,
and they're not
Amazon, they're not Google, they don't
need that. That could have been solved
with a query, could have replaced five
microservices.
That's an example of losing
sight of the problem
and following the advice blindly
of microservices are good, or APIs
are good. So keep the end problem
in mind of what problem we're
actually going to try to solve.
How's it going to be used?
One of the things I do is I love user personas,
and people in marketing use
user personas, and they're often quite vague.
They'll be an imaginary person.
I've used this in other talks, but my favorite is
Ann Taylor, the woman's clothier.
There is no person named Ann Taylor,
but you couldn't tell that inside of the
design meetings at Ann Taylor, because
she is a real person. She has a dog, dog has a name,
she has an address, she has a job.
They completely
describe her, and that's
who they make clothes for.
Marketing does that because they don't know their customers,
so they create usually a few
different personas that they are targeting.
I watch software development
teams inside of our organization.
We've got under 1,000 people,
and I have sat in meetings
where they debated, what does this user
persona want from this?
I'm like, that's Robin.
Call Robin and
ask him.
Why are we messing around with
dreaming up our...
Put a name on every user persona
if your organization is small,
and then ask that person,
is this solving your problem?
They may go yes, or they may go no,
so one way to stay out of that is make sure
what problem you're solving, who you're
solving it for, and ask them.
We've got a couple
of questions about the 80-16-4
role.
The first one is,
how can we keep our empathy
for that 80% and protect
them, and how do we avoid them
from just being seen as these low-skilled,
low-status people,
the disposable post-docs
of academia?
It depends on your organization.
In my shop,
I have empathy for them, but I don't
build most of my tools most of the time
are not for them.
They're using tools that put things into
systems, and I'm accessing it in the system.
I want to
make sure that they're taken care of
by our software development team,
but they're not mine to take care
of. They need sets of tooling.
In some ways, they may not
be your responsibility, depending
on how your organization is laid out. That's somebody else's
responsibility. If they're your responsibility,
you've got to figure out how to have
empathy for them and make the tooling they need,
but don't try to
make them a 16 or a 4. Don't try to
make them a power user or guru if they don't have any
interest in being. But if you get some of those
regular users, and we see this, we'll get users
that are like,
is it possible that I
could write a query to get this data out?
We're like, yeah, let's
talk about it. I can show you how to do that.
We'll move people,
but it isn't a career prerequisite
that people be moving from the 80
to the 60. It's not a career path map.
It's an organizational
structure. If you're responsible
for them, figure out how to love them.
If you're not responsible for them, eat lunch
with them so you understand their world,
but
I don't sit around worrying, are they
getting their needs met? That's somebody else's
job.
You actually answered both of the questions.
Twofer. I like it.
I had a question for you about some specific
metaphors of today and how you think
about them. I think the data warehouse,
the data lake,
and now the combination of the two,
which is the data lake house.
Oh my god.
I have dropped so much
profanity mocking
this marketing language around
these things. Let me tell you
how I think
about it. The data
warehouse means
to me, or the way I assume
people mean, and I'm afraid people use
these differently.
What it means to me is some
thought has been given to creating
fact tables and dimensions
and star or snowflake
schemas that cover multiple
areas of the business. It's usually a very
big lift to create a data
warehouse.
It takes a lot of top-down orchestration
to figure out the right granularity
of the data for your fact tables and
which things are dimensions and all
of this. It's a super
highly structured but really powerful,
but the problem becomes it's really
hard to get new stuff in because
it's a big change and you will never
change the granularity of it.
Once that granularity, the grain
of the data,
it's not easy to change.
It can be done, but it will be
a big lift to do that.
It's going to be slower moving, but it's
super valuable.
The data
lake
approach is a little more
you've got a system that
squirts data out, capture it.
It may be
logs, it may be some
sets of results. You're just accumulating
those in a way where they could be
queried later. Then data
lake house is like, let's
try to do a little bit of both all at once
and we're going to see,
and often what that means is you
create a bunch of ETL processes
in your data lake to extract
things that are interesting and drop them
in a schema where people can use them.
That's usually what it is, is ETL
on top of your data lake.
That's great.
A lot of these are marketing terms
to try to get people to talk about it.
I'm back to what problem are you trying to solve?
If we understand
what problem we're going to solve,
it may be fine to do one
or it may be we need the other.
Very few people are building
huge data warehouses
in my limited experience
because of this big cost
low agility feature.
Very slow to build
and they're very slow to change
and they're costly to build.
Because it spreads many parts of the organization,
everybody hates them fractionally
in their own special way.
I think that's part
and also storage has gotten so cheap.
We can just kind of forget
about dimension tables.
We just repeat our data
because we have columnar databases
so that's not near as costly
and storage is cheap.
We end up doing lots of big flat tables
stuck there that are useful.
We just think less
about data modeling
and you'll know when you're thinking
too little about data modeling
and you start sucking
and you're like maybe we should have
given some thought to data modeling
and you go back and do it
and we're all figuring this out
sort of emergently and organically.
Hope that answered.
I think we've got time for one last question.
I'm not sure whether this is for you or for me
but I'm going to give it to you.
How leaky do you consider something like dplyr?
I literally told Davis
at dinner two nights ago
that the thing I like about dplyr
is for SQL-like transformations.
So kind of the normal stuff
you might do with SQL.
I consider dplyr
as like an appliance.
One of the definitions of an appliance
is it just does what it's supposed to do.
You don't think about it.
You're dishwashing.
You don't think about how it works.
It just works.
Dplyr for a lot of that sort of stuff
I think it's very unleaky.
I think if you start trying to do
data frames inside of data frames
or whatever that foolishness is you let people do
Those
probably leak
but I don't know because I don't do them.
It's really good
for a bunch of stuff.
You guys have slowly morphed it over time
like how you change the cast and melt
to the pivot longer, pivot wider.
That's been actually
that has taken leakiness away
and taken friction away.
You can change an API
but it's really helpful
in reducing leaks.
I consider dplyr not particularly leaky.
What do you think about that?
How would you answer that?
The thing that I think about the most is dbplyr.
dbplyr leaks like a sieve.
Yeah.
We are trying to translate
our code to SQL.
Yes, it leaks at some level.
It leaks like a sieve
but amazingly it works.
Yeah.
I think the thing that's most surprising to me
is most of the stuff you're trying to do to data
like filtering and aggregation
you can do it in R,
you can do it in JavaScript, you can do it in SQL,
you can do it in Python.
It's all basically the same
and we can translate between that
with pretty high fidelity.
That's pretty surprising.
It really is kind of surprising.
Where it leaks is kind of akin to how SQL leaks
in that you start accumulating
the steps and then at some point
you get unexpected behavior.
That's not unique to dbplyr.
That's a little bit of the underlying SQL.
I have the same problem in SQL.
Then you have a permeating the membrane problem
because at some point
you go, fine, dump the query out.
I dump the query out and you say,
oh God, what have I done?
I have my DBAs tell me
I can tell when you're doing a db query
because it's got really crazy SQL
that no one would write.
So when it comes time
to solve some of those problems,
some of them aren't yours,
some of them are SQL,
but it can be a little tricky.
It's harder.
Yeah, that makes me think a fun talk would be.
We could spend probably 30 minutes
just talking about how leaky and abstraction SQL is.
Oh, we really could.
I was tempted to jump into that,
but I was like, no, I want a super succinct example
and floating point was just so succinct.
Thank you all very much.
Thank you.
Before we go for lunch,
just a couple of quick announcements.
This is kind of the last time
we're going to be all here together
in person, so I just wanted to start
by saying thank you.
First of all, I really wanted to thank
all of our speakers.
They have been working on their talks
in conjunction with our training partner
for like weeks now,
and I think you can really see the results of that
and the uniformly high quality
of the talks this year.
I'd also like to thank all of the sponsors.
If you haven't stopped by
the lounge already,
make sure to do that.
Most of them have got booths there.
Find out the cool stuff they're doing.
They're here at Comps
because we believe, and they believe,
that they can help you solve your problems.
I'd also like to give a big thanks
to all of my colleagues
at Posit, the colleagues
who are here both here in person
solving the many logistical problems
that have occurred so that you never experience
them, and to the many
employees who are also working
online as well.
In particular, I'd really like to thank
Caitlin and Brian who run our events team.
They have done just such a fabulous job
at Comp this year.
And finally, I'd like to thank all of you all.
Obviously, the Comp wouldn't happen
without your enthusiasm
and love for R
and Python and data science,
and it's been so wonderful to meet
so many of you here in person.
Thank you.
Now, you're probably getting sick of clapping
and you really want to hear
the next thing I'm going to tell you,
and that is, where is Comp going to be
next year?
And that is
Posit Comp 2024,
or in an effort to
embrace our Python colleagues,
we're also going to call it
From Posit Import Comp, Comp 2024.
But seriously,
it's going to be
in Seattle next year.
If you look closely
at those dates, you might notice
it is one day shorter than usual,
so next year we're going to be experimenting
with just doing a single day of workshops.
We're trying to bring
the overall cost of Comp down.
We're decreasing the ticket prices
a fair amount, and also just making
the whole thing a little bit cheaper
by reducing it by one day.
I also have an apology
to make to the members
of the vampire community who are with us this year.
We're going to have many
windows next year, and there will be
a lot of daylight as well.
So as always,
the cheapest possible price
to get a ticket is our Superfans price.
That's $6.99.
That's going to be on sale until October 6th.
We'll be sending out an email
to everyone who registered in the Conf
in the next couple of days, so you can sign up
for next year if you want.
So thanks again.
Please enjoy the rest of the conference,
and if I don't get to see you
or meet you personally, I really appreciate
you being here, and
good luck with data science
and the rest of your life.
Thanks.
Thank you.